## Data Manipulations

### Extracting data from files

Initially, the contents of the file in the UCI HAR dataset were read into data frames with the same respective names:

* activity_labels - contains the key for what each numeric activity label corresponds to
* features - contains the names of the variables measured in each observation
* subject_test - contains the subject labels in the test set
* x_test - contains the measurements taken for the subjects in the test set
* y_test - contains the activity labels for the test set
* subject_train - contains the subject labels in the training set
* x_train - contains the measurements taken for the subjects in the training set
* y_train - contains the activity labels for the training set

### Merging the training and test sets

The subject and activity labels for the training and test sets were added to the measurements in x_test or x_train with cbind to form a single data frame for each set. These sets were then merged with rbind (since the variable names in the sets were the same, they could be directly pushed together this way).  The variable names from the features file were applied to the respective columns with colnames, and the subject and activity columns were also appropriately labeled this way.  This step generated a data frame called merged_df with 563 variables.

### Extracting the mean and standard deviation variables

A data frame containing only the columns with "mean" (eg. tBodyAcc-mean()-X) or "Mean" (eg. angle(tBodyAccMean,gravity) was generated by subsetting the merged data frame with grep.  This was also done with the columns containing "std".  The subject and activity labels and these two subsets of the variables were joined together with cbind.  This resulted in a data frame called extracted_df with 88 variables.

### Giving descriptive names to the activity labels

A for loop was used to iterate over the rows of the new data frame and replace the numeric labels for the activities with their respective descriptions in the activity_labels file.  For example, all rows with 1 as their activity value had this changed to "WALKING".

### Creating the final tidy data set

Using for loops, the mean values in each column were calculated for each subject doing each activity.  The mean values were placed into a new data frame row by row with rbind.  This final data set, called final_df, had 180 observations for the 88 variables, one for each subject doing each activity.

### Variables

Subject - The subject being measured.  Numbered from 1 to 30.

Activity - The activity being performed.  Can be:
* WALKING
* WALKING_UPSTAIRS
* WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
* SITTING
* STANDING
* LAYING

Measurement features:

The remaining variables represent the measurements taken by the phone accelerometer on each observation.  Information on the original data is available in the features_info file.  The descriptions of the variables are quoted below:

```
These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.
 
tBodyAcc-XYZ   
tGravityAcc-XYZ  
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ  
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

mean(): Mean value
std(): Standard deviation
mad(): Median absolute deviation 
max(): Largest value in array
min(): Smallest value in array
sma(): Signal magnitude area
energy(): Energy measure. Sum of the squares divided by the number of values. 
iqr(): Interquartile range 
entropy(): Signal entropy
arCoeff(): Autorregresion coefficients with Burg order equal to 4
correlation(): correlation coefficient between two signals
maxInds(): index of the frequency component with largest magnitude
meanFreq(): Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency
skewness(): skewness of the frequency domain signal 
kurtosis(): kurtosis of the frequency domain signal 
bandsEnergy(): Energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window.
angle(): Angle between to vectors.

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable:

gravityMean
tBodyAccMean
tBodyAccJerkMean
tBodyGyroMean
tBodyGyroJerkMean
```
See the features_info file for complete information on how the measurements were collected.

After processing the data, only the variables estimating mean() and std() and the angle() variables were used in the tidy data set.

